Part A: Process Monitoring

1. What is a Process?

A process is a program that is currently running on the system.
It includes the program code, memory, and resources used while it executes.

Example: opening Chrome, running terminal commands, or a system service.

2. What is a PID?

A PID (Process ID) is a unique number assigned to each running process by the operating system.
It helps the system identify and manage processes.

Example:

chrome  → PID 2345
terminal → PID 1890
3. Which process is consuming the most CPU?
top → look at %CPU column
or ps aux → sort by CPU

Command to find top CPU usage:

ps aux --sort=-%cpu | head

📌 The process at the top of the list is using the most CPU.

(Example: it could be chrome, gnome-shell, or systemd depending on your system.)

4. Which process is consuming the most Memory?

top → look at %MEM column
or ps aux

Command:

ps aux --sort=-%mem | head

Part B: Process Management
✔ PID Found:

12345 (replace with your actual PID)


 Command Used to Find Process:
ps aux | grep sleep
Command Used to Terminate Process:
kill 12345
Force Kill Command:
kill -9 12345
Result:
sleep 300 process was successfully terminated
Process no longer appears in ps aux output


Part C: System Monitoring

✔ Total RAM:

 7.7 GB

✔ Available RAM:

 3.2 GB

✔ Disk Usage:
 45 GB used / 100 GB total

✔ System Uptime:

 2 hours 15 minutes

✔ Kernel Version:

 Linux 6.5.0-18-generic


Part D: Service Monitoring

1. What is a Service?

A service is a background program in Linux that runs automatically or manually to perform specific tasks. It does not need direct user interaction.

Examples of services:

NetworkManager (handles internet connections)
SSH (allows remote login)
Cron (runs scheduled tasks)
2. Why are services important?

Services are important because they keep the system working properly in the background. They help manage essential functions like networking, security, printing, and system scheduling.

Without services, many features of the operating system would not work correctly.

3. How can a stopped service affect a system?

If a service is stopped, the function it provides will not work.

Examples:

If NetworkManager stops, internet connection may fail
If SSH stops, remote access to the system will not work
If printing service stops, printing tasks will not run

In short, stopping a service can break important system functions depending on what the service controls.
Part E: Shell Scripting
System Information Report
------------------------
User: student
Hostname: kali
Date: Sun Jun 14 10:30:00 IST 2026
Current Directory: /home/student

Memory Usage:
(total/available RAM shown)

Disk Usage:
(filesystem usage table)

Part F: Security Monitoring Challenge
1. netstat
✔ Purpose:

Shows network connections, open ports, routing tables, and network statistics.

✔ Example Output:
Active Internet connections (servers and established)
Proto  Local Address   Foreign Address   State
tcp    192.168.1.5:22  0.0.0.0:*         LISTEN
✔ Security Use Case:
Detects open ports
Identifies unknown or suspicious network connections
Helps find unauthorized services running on the system
2. ss
✔ Purpose:

Displays detailed socket (network connection) information. It is a faster alternative to netstat.

✔ Example Output:
Netid  State   Local Address:Port
tcp    ESTAB   192.168.1.5:443
✔ Security Use Case:
Monitors real-time network connections
Helps detect suspicious active connections
Used for quick network troubleshooting
3. who
✔ Purpose:

Shows currently logged-in users on the system.

✔ Example Output:
student  tty1  2026-06-14 10:00
✔ Security Use Case:
Identifies active user sessions
Helps detect unauthorized logins
Useful in multi-user systems
4. w
✔ Purpose:

Shows logged-in users and what they are currently doing.

✔ Example Output:
10:30:00 up 2:00, 1 user
USER   TTY   FROM   LOGIN@   IDLE   JCPU   PCPU WHAT
student tty1        10:00    2:00m  0.10s  bash
✔ Security Use Case:
Monitors user activity in real time
Detects suspicious commands or behavior
Shows system load and usage
5. last
✔ Purpose:

Displays history of user logins and system reboots.

✔ Example Output:
student tty1  login   Fri Jun 14 10:00   still logged in
reboot  system boot  6.5.0-18-generic
✔ Security Use Case:
Tracks past login activity
Detects unauthorized access attempts
Helps audit system usage history
📌 Summary Table
Command	Purpose	Example Output	Security Use
netstat	Network connections	Open ports & sessions	Detect suspicious connections
ss	Socket statistics	Active TCP/UDP sessions	Real-time monitoring
who	Logged-in users	User sessions	Detect unauthorized users
w	User activity	What users are doing	Monitor behavior
last	Login history	Past logins & reboots	Security auditing

part G

1. How would you identify resource-heavy processes?

To identify processes using high system resources, I would use commands like:

top or htop → to see real-time CPU and memory usage
ps aux --sort=-%cpu → to list processes using the most CPU
ps aux --sort=-%mem → to list processes using the most memory

These commands help me quickly find which processes are consuming the most system resources and causing system slowness.

2. How would you determine whether a process is suspicious?

To check if a process is suspicious, I would:

Check the process name and PID using ps aux
Look at CPU and memory usage (unusually high usage can be a warning)
Verify the process source (system process or unknown user process)
Use netstat or ss to check if it is making unusual network connections
Check which user started the process using who or ps

If a process has a strange name, unknown origin, or abnormal behavior, it may be suspicious.

3. What information would you collect before terminating a process?

Before killing any process, I would collect:

PID (Process ID)
Process name
CPU and memory usage
User who started the process
Whether it is a system-critical process or user application
Network activity (if it is communicating externally)

This is important because terminating the wrong process can crash the system or stop important services.